# Hilbert

Hilbert fue tal vez uno de los mat mas destacados de su epoca, pero si
fue su "guia"

The historty says about the time that Hilbert was seen day after day
in torn trousers, a source of embarrassment to many. The task of
tactfully informing Hilbert of the situation was delegated to his
assistant, Richard Courant.  Knowing the pleasure Hilvert took in
Strolls in the coountry side while talking maths,Courant invited him
for a walk.  Courant managed matters so that the pair walked through
some thorny bushes, at which point Courant informed Hilert that he had
evidently torn his pants on one of the bushes, "Oh no", Hilber
replied, "they've been that way for weeks, but nobody notices"

From the ivnention of the calculus (Leibniz and Newton) math have been
found a lot of specular applications of limit proccess. but by the
middke of the 19th century problems were arising that demanded
conceptual understanding that went beyond symbols.

the first big result Hilbert has obtained was "Hilber's Basis
Theorem". (Gordan Prob)

Byt instead of furnishing a list of key invariants whose existance
Hilbert had established, this proof had merely shown that the
supposition of their nonexistence would lead to contradiction.
Hilbert's proof opened a windows on the math of the coming century.
Gordan responde was:*this is not math, is theology*. some months later
Hilbert fave Gordan a complete constructive proof.

Hilbert was very interested in the foundation of math Being a
geometrist Hilbert first focus on geometri. He gave a course where he
provided a set of axioms for geometry that plugged some gpping holes
in Euclid's classic tratment. He emphasized the abstract natura of the
subject: it must be shown by pure logic that the theorems follow from
the axioms without the corrupting influence of what we can "see" by
looking at the diagram. Hilbert provided a proof that his axioms are
consistens, that no contradiction can be derived from them.

Infact he reduce the consistency of Euclideian geometry to that of
arithmetic.

Hilbert published a set of problems that would lead the math
researchers all over the world.

The problem of the consistency of arithmetic was prob #2. In Hilbert's
new program, math and logic were to be developed together in a purel
formal symbolic language.
